hey guys when I tackle these issues if
I've got a choice now I'm going to
tackle them what I like to do is to talk
about the controversy at the moment and
then talk about the more profound
underlying political and philosophical
issues in a way that will still be
interesting if I come back and watch
this video myself five years from now
ten years from now when the controversy
the moment has been forgotten the
controversy of the moment right now
really it's a long series of debates
vegan gains is right now engaged in a
one-man crusade to debate every imbecile
who makes excuses for eating meat on the
internet and to scoff at and laugh at
their ridiculous excuses and
rationalizations for why they eat meat
one at a time so a shout out to Richard
shoutout to vegan gains obviously he is
in large part doing this as a form of
entertainment for his audience it's not
entirely serious but of course there
also is a serious message he's trying to
deliver you know the one person at a
time and of course he has a big audience
so in some ways it's reaching a hundred
thousand people at a time so obviously I
respect the effort he's making even
though quite honestly from my
perspective I do find many of his
arguments logically flawed and
counterproductive and needlessly
combative and creating a hostility
sometimes when he's debating with people
who are actually inclined to to not be
hostile toward him he is a debate with
anti-war ski as an example anti-war ski
began that debate as a somewhat humble
ex vegan as someone who had tried
veganism and felt it didn't work for him
as a diet any worse he began that with a
really positive fairly warm and
conciliatory set of attitudes and they
got stuck into this ridiculous debate
ridiculous from my perspective about
what would you do if space aliens
conquered earth and if these space
aliens began exploiting human beings
human lives for meat in the same way the
humans exploit animals I sympathize with
why they engaged in that conversation I
understand the series of steps that led
to that debate and why I took on that
form but yeah I do feel that a lot of
those debates are ridiculous if you guys
find them entertaining and lighting
great obviously a lot of people do with
that caveat having been said the latest
debate as of this moment is between
vegan gains and a much more hostile
dismissive and derisive character
was named in the description of this
video um but it seemed to me really
significant that in this debate vegan
gains was in the early stages I think
tripped up and kind of shocked and had
to deal with the unwanted assertion that
vegans are inevitably and ineluctably
killing animals by participating in
grain agriculture that by farming wheat
by farming other grains by farming rice
or what-have-you also we are constantly
killing animals and that therefore
veganism as an animal rights paradigm
does not make sense now this critique it
actually does cut pretty deep and I've
seen vegans respond to it across the
board I have seen Gary frenzy on a
struggle to deal with this because Gary
Franchione eggs by the way if you
haven't heard of them he's probably the
single most influential political
theorist about veganism today in 2017
I think his views are now going out of
fashion but the last five years I think
he has been he's led the most successful
the most influential school of vegan
thought the so-called abolitionist
approach I don't subscribe to it but I
recognize their success and how Fletcher
live in Gary France aione even for him
this is really an unwanted and
uncomfortable challenge and ultimately
when vegan gains was discussing it he
ended up appealing to the idea of the
ethics of intention so in a sense vegan
gains conceded that the difference
between a vegan eating wheat and a
meat-eater eating a steak is not an
absolute and categorical difference it's
a difference which if measured in the
number of animals being killed the
amount of suffering or the amount of
harm that we can quantify that we can
think of as being on a spectrum
it's admitting that wheat farming is
also killing some animals even though
obviously if you look at the full cycle
of production if you scale it up and do
the math all the ecological impacts as
well as the animal suffering impacts
what have you eating the steak is much
worse but where we are dealing with a
difference of degree and not a
difference of kind I think it is really
significant I think it is really worth
dwelling on and reflecting on the extent
to which this issue of grain agriculture
the extent to which it is a shocking and
unwelcome challenge to most vegans and
most vegan schools of thought why do I
emphasize that because it is not a
challenge to my approach and my school
of thought I have a playlist I'll give
the link below this channel circle of
this video ever playlist here on this
channel uh devoted to what I call the
wildlife management approach to veganism
I differ from other vegans in many many
ways I differ in not glorifying pet
ownership not glorifying you know taking
a dog and castrating it domesticating it
turning it into a toy for human
entertainment I say no that is not the
moral baseline taking care of your pets
is not the moral baseline we have to
look at how that dog would have lived in
the wild if it were a wolf we can't look
at photos of a cute little cuddly piglet
a piglet that has probably been
castrated and domesticated as being
raised in someone's living room and say
just because it's cute that that's the
moral baseline we have to look at a wild
boar living in the forest where indeed
wild boars will attack and try to eat
people it's a very different approach
that proceeds from normatively looking
at how animals would live in the wild
but step two of this is that I
completely concede the point that the
concept of animal rights is a human
centered projection I do not believe
that animals have souls
I also do not believe that human beings
have souls I believe that human beings
in the same way that we create arbitrary
legal distinctions and impose them on
one another we create arbitrary legal
distinctions and impose them on animals
I think a really good example of this
that almost everybody accepts very very
few people with debate it within the
United States and within Canada every
state in every province has some legal
standard for what's called the age of
consent and most people don't really
care what it is maybe it's 18 maybe it's
16 but we know there is some age after
which people can take moral
responsibility for the decisions what
age can you drive a car
what age can you drink alcohol whatever
the age maybe
however arbitrary that decision is we
all accept the idea that ultimately
human being sit down and they draw a
line in the sand they write a law that
establishes that that barrier and then
we all accept it and we all live with it
we can debate what the age is but we're
not really debating the concept that at
some point you're too young to drive a
car you're too young to own a gun too
young to vote too young to pay your own
taxes and that conversely there's some
point when you're too old to have
another person take responsibility that
you must take responsibility for
yourself in the same way I think it is
completely arbitrary that human beings
sit down and they draw a line on the map
and they say on that side of the line we
have a habitat conservation area and
over there the rights of animals are
protected whether it's a bear or whether
it's Gophers ground squirrels animals
that would eat the food we're farming
whether they're rats wolves elephants
what-have-you and then on the other side
of that line if the elephants come into
the city if the Bears come into the city
if the rats come into your own basement
if the cockroaches are crawling on your
own walls we do not recognize the animal
separates so this is the opposite of a
model based on inalienable rights or a
model based on the soul or the spirit of
the animal or the animals intelligence I
embrace the fact that these are
ultimately arbitrary distinctions we
create and it is to some extent for the
animals benefit and it's the some extent
for our benefit as human beings because
they're just human inventions the human
inventions that ultimately have to do
with the function of our own society so
ultimately governments will sit down and
draw lines in a map and decide over
there we have grain farming and over
here we have habitat conservation now
this approach has really many many
examples I have I am not at all tripped
up by these questions that trip up being
gains because my approach to beacon ism
is so fundamentally different so
fundamentally alien I'm also not tripped
up in any way whatsoever when for
example meat-eaters raise questions
about the ethics of palm oil production
I've done videos about that in the past
I guess I can put a link below this
video to to me what's fundamental is to
get across the point look it doesn't
matter if you're chopping down the
forest to produce wood or if you're
chopping down the forest to produce palm
oil or if you're chopping down the
forest to produce strawberries
agriculture absolutely all plant
agriculture is created and sustained
through violence conceptually speaking
it's violence against the wild it's an
act of violence that reduces a forest to
being a farm and then is it a constant
state of war against the weeds to try to
take back that farm the new saplings the
new trees that are trying to spread up
it's a constant state of war against the
various species whether you think of
them as pests or otherwise the various
animals and insects and what-have-you
that are going to come in and try to
take back that farm ultimately each of
those animals is just trying to survive
each of those plants is just try to
survive but the effect of what they're
trying to do is they're trying to take a
totally unnatural human invention the
farm and have it revert to being you
know a forest or a grassy field to be in
part of the wild part of the wilderness
that is what I see as the underlying
struggle that's going on at all times in
agriculture of any kind now the good
news is with veganism if fewer and fewer
people eat meat that means that the land
we need to feed the same number of human
beings to feed 1 billion people let's
say we need dramatically less land the
land use to feed 1 billion vegans is
dramatically lower than the land that we
need to feed 1 billion meat-eaters
this is well proven and well attested
you can get the stats out of a number of
United Nations agencies as well as local
national studies or national governments
around the world the math is quite
simple to do the fundamental reason for
that is that animals like pigs and cows
don't just live for five minutes they
have to be raised up fed a diet of grain
before they're slaughtered themselves
the amount of water that's needed is
dramatically dramatically lower to
sustain a population of 1 billion vegans
as opposed to 1 billion meat-eaters and
so on so actually the potential for
wildin the potential to really expand
the amount of area on the Earth's
surface that's devoted to true animal
welfare because true animal welfare is
animals living in the wild not animals
living as a toy on your carpet the
potential is there as more and more
people become vegan we will have more
and more resources just in the form of
unused available land that we can devote
to being wildlife preserves to being
habitat preservation areas to benefit
animals but in my way of thinking that
is the only way human beings benefit
animals we set up a fence and the main
purpose of that fence is not to keep the
animals inside it's to keep human beings
out it's to keep the hunters out is to
keep anyone who wants to exploit the
animals or cut down the trees exploits
have set out ultimately we have to
employ guards around every National Park
just to prevent illegal logging this is
a reality in third world countries it's
a reality within Canada everywhere
there's always economic pressure to
start destroying the wild as soon as
it's regenerated or as soon as you have
an intact forest but the idea that there
is some kind of stark ethical difference
between farming palm oil on a palm oil
plantation and farming mangoes in the
same climate is deeply deeply flawed to
me and I don't see why vegans or meteors
want to trade in this now conversely as
vegan gains has just argued there is a
very very deep ethical difference
between eating beef and eating lentils
or eating wheat or what-have-you but in
how we approach this problem I think
that vegans who want to imagine either
they think really about the ethics of
the soul or they construe the ethical
argument another way you set yourself up
for failure if the reality of human
being is needing to eat wheat needy rice
needy beans if that comes in as an
unwanted distraction at the
of your line of thinking I think you
should turn around 180 degrees and put
that first and foremost the grim reality
of the 21st century is that we live on a
planet that is almost 100% subordinated
to human needs and human conveniences
we're almost the entire surface of the
world exists for our exploitation
whether that's for the production of
food the production of electricity the
production of plastic items and
factories you name it and the only thing
you can contrast that to are the areas
where again human laws human governments
humans have sat down and projected their
own values onto the map and decided no
it has to stop somewhere somewhere we
have to draw a dotted line and have
armed guards and have some land that
exists not for our benefit but for the
benefit of the forest itself for the
benefit of all the species of animals
that live within that forest itself
that's where our domain ends and their
domain begins I think that is the
ultimate ethical difference that we
should base our arguments for veganism
on that we have to base a vegan
philosophy on and the result is a much
more coherent and meaningful approach to
vegan activism then these other
approaches that frankly people fill up
my email box with arguing our spirit
amount so you can contrast this to an
argument where people claim any
oppression of animals is speciesism
well is it speciesism if you kill
cockroaches inside your own apartment
a lot of vegans say well that's an
exception to the rule but they still
want to cling to the species this
paradigm is it speciesism if every time
you eat bread you are paying someone to
kill Gophers and squirrels ground
squirrels the other animals is it
speciesism if every time you use edible
oil like palm oil you're indirectly
paying for orangutangs to be killed and
again it's just as true of mangoes as it
is of palm oil there is no difference
the same species of animals like monkeys
and orangutangs will want to come onto a
mango farm or a durian farm and there
are mean old farmers with with rifles
there
shoot the monkeys so they don't ruin the
mango crop or the durian crop wherever
the example may be say well that's an
exception to the rule but still this
species is paradigm this is how we have
to think of it or still this idea that
animals all have souls or have rights
equivalent human rights I don't see it
that way at all I I killed cockroaches
just last night inside this apartment
I'm a vegan but I don't want to be part
of a political movement that's built on
a lie I don't want to be part of a
religious movements built in a lie and
to some extent when you get into these
more spiritual approaches to veganism it
starts to resemble both it starts to
resent a phony pseudo spiritual
religious movement masquerading as a
political movement that to me just rings
hollow
and it does set us up for reputation by
anyone who will just say well what about
growing wheat what about eating bread
for me instead I embrace entirely that
these are human created values human
created laws ultimately reflecting human
responsibilities human civilization is
destructive and in many ways ineluctably
tragic I can't live in this apartment
without killing cockroaches without
occasionally killing mosquitoes I think
it would be better not to morally it
would be better if I could catch the
cockroaches and put them outside without
harming them it would be better if we
could grow wheat without killing all
kinds of different mammals but we can't
and we won't
what we can do is recognize our
responsibility our unique position as
human beings in the 21st century in a
period of our history when there is no
great untamed wilderness what we have
our little patches here and there of
carefully controlled wilderness under
human sovereignty under human management
when our responsibility to the animals
and to the planet is to make those
decisions on their behalf for their
benefit and for ours for where the
exploitation is going to end for where
there are no more farms for where
there's no more factories where the land
exists for the sake of the animals
themselves
and yes indirectly for the ecology for
the air for the water that we over lie
on